# Pictorus

Pictorus is a cloud-native software development platform for control systems, which generates and deploys Rust-language code to connected devices directly from your browser.

## [Documentation](https://docs.pictor.us) - [Website](https://pictor.us)

## Repository structure

This repository contains a virtual workspace that includes all of the crates required by code generated by Pictorus. The current crates are as follows:

### Stable crates

These are the primary public-facing crates that are likely to be used by most users. The goal is to eventually stabilize these crates and follow semver.

- [pictorus-traits](./pictorus-traits/) - This crate contains all of the traits that define block behavior. New blocks can be created by implementing these traits, allowing users to quickly spin up custom functionality.
- [pictorus-blocks](./pictorus-blocks/) - This crate contains all of the pre-built blocks available in Pictorus. These blocks implement the traits defined in `pictorus-traits`.

### Internal crates

These crates are not intended to be consumed by external users and are likely to change without notice.

- [pictorus-internal](./pictorus-internal/) - This crate contains other traits/structs/utilities referenced by generated code.
- [block-data](./block-data/) - This crate contains legacy code for passing data between blocks. This will be removed in the future.

#### Platform-specific crates

These crates implement the platform-specific drivers needed to interact with I/O in Pictorus apps. These drivers serve as the common interface by which apps ineract with I/O on various platforms.

- [pictorus-linux](./pictorus-linux/) - Linux-specific drivers (i.e. Raspberry Pi)
- [pictorus-sim](./pictorus-sim/) - Simulation drivers (for use in the Pictorus simulator)
- [pictorus-stm32](./pictorus-stm32/) - STM32-specific drivers

## Developing

To build the project, you should only need Rust installed. If you are contributing to the project, we also use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) to run some git hooks, which requires Python to be installed. For convenience, you can install the required dependencies by running `./script/setup`.
